Age -- 32
Homeland -- Troy
Occupation -- Prince and hero of Troy

Hector of Troy was a Trojan Prince and warrior of Troy. He was the first-born son of King Priam and Queen Hecuba, making him a prince of the royal house and heir to his father’s throne. Hector wed with Andromache, who was his wife, and the mother of his first and only infant son, Scamandrius, who the people of Troy knew as Astyanax.

Hector throughout the Trojan War brought glory to the Trojans as he was their best fighter and heir. He was loved by all his people and known for never turning down a fight. He was gracious to all and thus thought of favorably by all, except by the Achaeans. As he was the Trojan's best warrior he was both hated and feared by the Achaeans. He turned the tide of battle, breaking down their barriers and slaughtering their troops. Although when he killed Patroclus, Achilles reentered the war and the Trojans were beaten back again.

Hector died at the hand of the Achaean warrior named Achilles. According to Homer’s epic, “The Iliad”, Hector was killed in single combat by Achilles. Hector’s parents sat on Troy’s wall, pleading for him to take shelter within the safe walls. Hector refused, wanting to talk with Achilles, in an attempt to resolve the altercation without bloodshed, though Achilles was not one to be reasoned with due to Hector slaying his close wartime companion, Patroclus. Achilles chased Hector around the gates of Troy three times. Apollo gave Hector strength so he could always stay in the lead. But whenever he neared the entrance of the walls to the city, Achilles cut him off. Finally Athena took the guise of his favorite brother, Deiphobus telling him that they could face Achilles together. Tricked into thinking he might have a chance at winning, Hector waited for Achilles. He then proposes that whoever wins, be it him or Achilles, will be respectful to the other's body and give it back to the other's friend so they can have a proper burial. Achilles refuses saying that there was "...no love between us. No truce till the other falls and gluts with blood." After a short fight, Achilles stabbed Hector in his throat, which resulted in his untimely but fated death. Hector then foretold Achilles' own death, saying that he would be killed by Paris and Apollo. 

During and after Patroclus' funeral, Achilles dragged Hector's body around his pyre. The gods Aphrodite and Apollo protected his body from the dogs, disfigurement, and decomposition. It would be another 12 days until Priam would go to Achilles with a ransom for Hector's body. 