Shocking twists within Jupiter’s thunderstorms
Even on Earth, lightning is something of an unsolved mystery. We know that typically in cloud-to-ground lightning, negative charges in a thundercloud square off against positive charges on the ground. Just like a battery, opposites attract, and an electric discharge is released in the form of a lightning flash.

Still, there are gaps in our understanding that could be answered through further research of Jovian lightning, and vice versa.

With the information we have, it seems there are some similarities in the basic mechanics of lightning on both planets. But for so many reasons—like the composition of Jupiter’s atmosphere—there are stark differences. On Earth, most of our lightning strikes around the equator, but on Jupiter, it seems more prevalent in the hemispheres, specifically the northern one. This is certainly on-brand for Jupiter, given that its north pole is already pandemonium; it appears to be home to a cluster of cyclones.

Why lightning doesn’t seem to strike Jupiter’s equator is still largely unknown. There’s evidence to suggest it might be influenced by the way weather forms on Jupiter in general, which is very different from how weather works on our planet. Terrestrial weather, for example, mainly forms in the troposphere, which is the layer of atmosphere closest to Earth. So many of our natural occurrences are influenced by the Sun and the fact that our planet has solid ground.

Jupiter, on the other hand, doesn’t have a “true” surface. Its weather seems to be driven by powerful forces deep within the planet, which may give rise to the gas giant’s spectacular tempests.

Though the amount of sunlight Jupiter receives seems to play a role in its weather, the connection isn’t totally understood. According to NASA, since the planet is 757 million kilometers (about 470 million miles) from the Sun, it gets about 25 times less sunlight than Earth. It’s possible that sunlight creates more balanced upper atmospheric conditions near Jupiter’s equator, where the planet receives more sunlight, and greater instability toward the poles, since warm air from deep within the planet is able to rise freely. This instability is ideal for lightning to form.

Of course, as is typically the case with Jupiter, there’s rarely one answer that neatly explains everything. It’s possible that Jupiter’s magnetic field could be somehow linked to the planet’s weather processes, and in theory, lightning. In Juno’s extended mission, scientists hope to get more high-resolution data from the spacecraft’s suite of instruments that will give further evidence to support theories – or offer up new ones.

uhhhhh.... wait a minute... whoops wrong Jupiter

https://www.planetary.org/articles/lightning-on-jupiter-unsolved-mysteries